docs.md, before:





# Formal Ontology



## Why formal ontology? And if so, how?

### Background history on formal ontology

From ancient metaphysics to the birth of the internet.



Most applications are some sort of ontological data model. Data integration can usher in a new era of the web. We can envision a new paradigm called "ontological programming", and a "datanet" where people can share, link, publish, and attest (i.e. confirm validity of) data feeds. Companies can earn money publishing data feeds instead of developing apps.



Work in progress.


note how there are almost no good fully open source eontology tools. like graphdb, ontotext. all for enterise. "formal ontology for th emasses" becuas we are makign tmainstream. the smeanti web is for scienctist, it also faile do bridge the gpa.



Like, taskwarrior: that is an ontology. but the ontolgoy is flawed. our tools do not conforfm to the semantic strucutres in our mind. empahisze that.

promte on stack excange profile for more donors.



other parts like, about logic, about rdf, et.


"manifesto.json" - manifesto

Commit message:

Update documentation with LLM connection details
Added notes about connecting to LLMs and related topics.

docs.md, after:





# Formal Ontology



## Why formal ontology? And if so, how?

### Background history on formal ontology

From ancient metaphysics to the birth of the internet.



Most applications are some sort of ontological data model. Data integration can usher in a new era of the web. We can envision a new paradigm called "ontological programming", and a "datanet" where people can share, link, publish, and attest (i.e. confirm validity of) data feeds. Companies can earn money publishing data feeds instead of developing apps.



Work in progress.


note how there are almost no good fully open source eontology tools. like graphdb, ontotext. all for enterise. "formal ontology for th emasses" becuas we are makign tmainstream. the smeanti web is for scienctist, it also faile do bridge the gpa.



Like, taskwarrior: that is an ontology. but the ontolgoy is flawed. our tools do not conforfm to the semantic strucutres in our mind. empahisze that.

promte on stack excange profile for more donors.




"You can plant an idea in the garden of your mind."



connect to llms as backend for ontological rag.

or llm tool use.





other parts like, about logic, about rdf, et.


"manifesto.json" - manifesto
